---
layout: post
title:  "Salt and Vinegar Pancakes"
date:   2025-05-22 13:57:00 +0100
categories: diary
---

Yesterday I had a bit of a breakthrough when I was looking into the difference between textural and structural properties in soils. This led to the subject of aggregation, and to a concept that I had been aware of for some time although not in the context of the many years of soil mechanics I have studied. When I was younger on the beach I used to think that the clumps of sand that would form from the dry layer at the surface looked like salt and vinegar pancakes. Until now I didn't think much of the fact that soil has lumps in it when digging in the garden, but as it turns out, both these and the salt and vinegar pancakes were my lifelong exposure to soil aggregation. Soil particules are not just the granules, air and water, but also their structure into these aggregates or "peds". These are very important in soil processes as water can flow slowly through the peds (called "matrix flow" in "micropores"), and faster in between them (called "preferential flow" through "macropores"). This is also where the concept of tortuosity comes from: the twistiness of the path of the water through the soil (see e.g. the Tesla Valve). I know from yesterday's reading that soil organic matter, roots, microbes and earthworms have influence on the aggregation process. I feel as though there might be some interesting hypothesis to consider relating to this topic, so I would like to first find the fundamental way in which SOC and aggregation are related, and see where we go from there. When it comes to how SOC and aggregation relate to soil health, I think they both interact with each other such that we have a chicken and the egg situation. Is there a way to encapsulate the whole thing in a single representation cf Lorenz attractor?