---
layout: post
title:  "First post: a brain dump of what I want"
date:   2025-05-20 13:28:00 +0100
categories: diary braindump
---

Hi there! You are joining me on my first day of having created my github pages website, which is something I've been hoping to get started for some time now. Many moons ago, I think when I was still an RA at HKUST before my MPhil even began, I bought a domain for a website that I intended to set up but never in the end got around to. I've realised now that the best strategy instead is to start with the content and then if it turns out that this whole website idea has momentum then maybe I will treat myself to a fancy domain name. So for now welcome to a very plain black and white dpb-hydro.github.io

I don't really know why exactly it is that I'd like a website. My wife is really good at making websites so I guess my fundamental interest is in building something cool like hers, but also it feels like something I should have as part of my professional portfolio. Those two aims are perhaps opposing, because if I'm curating this site for my career then I am going to have to avoid all the goofy stuff I might be wanting to add if I were just making this for my own hobby. For the moment I'll be trying to keep a balance between the two and we'll see which becomes more important down the line. 

I must say I'm finding it a little frustrating at this point that the site is just in plain black and white. I know there's a lot I want to do in terms of making a unique design even to the point of logos and fonts, but even following the intro to github pages tutorial to get to this point proved to be quite a challenge. It can be a demotivating experience every time you start working with a new platform with specific ways of doing things. I feel like I've only just become reasonably competent with using LaTeX before starting on this website endeavour, and that was a very bang-my-head-on-the-table experience for a large proportion, and now I am staring down the barrel of exactly the same experience now that I need to get to grips with Jekyll and possibly, oh horror, html and whatever CSS is. I hope I can look back on this post some time in the not-too-distant future and feel satisfied with how much I have learned about web design, although I am not especially looking forward to the process of getting to that point.

One particularly important skill that I am hoping to develop by curating this website is to improve my writing. Not so much the quality of it but just the habit of turning my brain clouds into coherent strings that other people could potentially read and understand at least some of. A couple of weeks ago I completed the report for the Early Stage Assessment of my PhD programme, and just like every time I have written something in the past, it took so much more time and effort than I first thought it would. I am reminded of the most painful writing experiences of my life, namely my year 8 Japan project, my year 11 crime and punishment coursework, and my university first year Professional Engineering Practice essay. There was nothing particularly unbearable about the subject matter in each of these, but emotionally they inflated to the point of feeling endless. During my MPhil work I came across a forum post about someone who had to make some substantial changes to their PhD thesis and in their words, felt like they had nothing left to give. I can completely understand the feeling; after staring at the same words for weeks on end the thought of any more little tweaks seems like major heavy lifting. So this is why I want to start a habit of writing down coherent prose, to hopefully mitigate this heavy lifting feeling in future. I would also like to improve my writing style so that it isn't quite so boring. I'm very conscious, for example, of how many times I have started a sentence with "I" in this post. I guess that will have to continue until I can unlearn this. I'm currently reading (albeit extremely slowly) *Gravity's Rainbow* by Thomas Pynchon as well as *We* by Yevgeny Zamyatin. It's clear from both of their styles that they were both trained in STEM and I really like how they have made this trade into such impactful pieces of art. They've inspired me somewhat to try this myself but I've only got a couple of incoherent ideas floating around in the back of my head which I would somehow need to stitch together into a story that actually means something. My worry about making a start on this is that the writing would just sound boring like this post and would somehow need to feel "artistic". But I don't know how I would do this without sounding fake. I suppose like with most things I won't know until I try; maybe this website would be a good place to give it a go?

Back to reasons I want to have a blog-type site, now would be a good time to mention ChatGPT and all the other LLMs out there. We are certainly at the beginning of something when it comes to these gizmos, but hard to say if it will go the way of 3D TVs and the metaverse or the way of smartphones. It does concern me a bit the thought of other people tapping away at an LLM when they're working, especially to find out the answer to something that would up to now have been a google search. I just don't want to lose the ability to do writing, searching and consolidating information independently. My wife and I came up with an analogy that I liked when we were driving in our hire car the other week; it's fine until something goes wrong, i.e. I'm quite happy driving the car I just pray that I'm not asked to fix anything myself. The more independent we are, the more resilient we can be. Personally, to take a stance that isn't purely that of an AI Luddite, I could accept AI tools playing a greater role in information gathering/processing, but I think that people should never hand over the role of decision-making to a computer. To make another hire car analogy, the car we were using last week had lots of bells and whistles such as a gear suggestion and cruise control; these were helpful over what would be provided in an old fashioned car but didn't take away from my ultimate ability to make decisions. This isn't something that could be said for autonomous cars, which do concern me for this reason.

I think that puts everything in words about my motivation for starting a website, which leads me to what I want to do in the rest of my PhD project. It's nice to have submitted my ESA report and be back at the stage of having some flexibility with what to do with each of my days. Inevitably everything I want to do takes some time, and I get into the habit of wanting to do any task to completion as soon as I start it, rather than doing little bits of things here and there. This is something I'd like to be better at going forward. A big part of what I want to achieve is improving my theory; both to do with recent literature and more fundamental knowledge such as the theory implemented in T&C. There are books I would like to read; primarily in my head at the moment are "Scientists Must Write", "Doing a Systematic Review", Hillel's "Soil Physics", and Tivy's "Agricultural Ecology". I would also like to expand in great detail on the papers I referenced in my ESA, as I feel that these provide a good backbone on which I can expand for my final thesis. I could maybe find a place on my website for my flow chart of literature and other concepts, and on the subject of svgs maybe also my Gantt chart? I would like to get to grips with Fortran using Curcic's "Modern Fortran" book, and it would also be really great to finally get The Mill up and running again. A sensitivity analysis/disection on T&C using simple functions would be great, and I'd also like to try out RothC as I think this is a pretty common one when it comes to SOC modelling. Finally, I'd like to find a better way of note taking, as I'm not sure how well my bullet journal approach works when I fall out of the habit after some time. I'm not sure if the website is the best place for those, but it could be a good place to assemble these thoughts into coherent prose. 

Writing this post has been a good experience, and I think I've written everything that was in my head for now! Let's see how well I can keep the habit of writing down my thoughts; maybe I can do another post later today? For now I will leave you with a random problem that one day I hope to be able to fix. I am currently in a shared working space wearing both ear plugs and ear defenders, yet still I can hear sounds coming through other parts of my skull. Will I ever find true silence???