---
layout: single
title: "Hickory Dickory Dock"
date: 2026-03-30 15:05:00 +0100
last_modified_at: 2026-03-30 15:05:00 +0100
categories: reflections
tags: dynamics epistemology
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/hare_tortoise.jpg
related: true
---

⚠️**Post under construction**: please return again another day⚠️

Oh boy, is this not one of the most relatable videos I've seen:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ZSSNFkEMv24?si=rT7G4JesS1Tgyf1y" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I'm sure everyone can relate to the blank feeling when something is explained to you for the first time. Perhaps for many subjects this is how it stays in your mind forever, just a shaky concept that you hope you never have to explain to somebody in simple terms. Perhaps you can remember times when a long-misunderstood concept finally clicked, perhaps just because of one particular way that somebody put it. It might not have been particularly nuanced or insightful, but whatever it was, the understanding is suddenly a lot clearer. And you wonder why it really took you so long it it really is so simple. It feels as though all it takes to understand it was just that one explanation who put it the right way. I think if we feel negative about that then we might be forgetting about the fallacy of the [Straw that broke the camel's back](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_that_broke_the_camel%27s_back); all of that misunderstanding might have been a prerequisite for understanding it at that time. And there is also the idea that the way you understood it might be different than how somebody else's brain works. While my post on (Scientific Parables)[/reflections/parables/] contains more about 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/hare_tortoise.jpg" alt="The hare and tortoise clock, Rugby" caption="The hare and tortoise clock, Rugby" %}

I must say until recently it eluded me to think how a clock pendulum actually works.

 When it's tricky draw

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/pendulum.gif" alt="Animation of a forced damped pendulum" caption="Fun with pendulums" %}

I wonder if understnading this takes geophysical fluid dynamics down a notch cf coriolis.